**Plant scientists support the safety of genetic modification
technology**

*Claims that scientific doubt remains about the food safety of
Genetically Modified Organism (GMO) technologies are misleading and
hinder the next Green Revolution*

Noah Fahlgren^1^, Rebecca Bart^1^, Luis Herrera-Estrella^2^, Rubén
Rellán-Álvarez^2^, Daniel H. Chitwood^1,\*^, José R. Dinneny^3,\*^

*^1^Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, USA.
^2^National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity, Irapuato, Mexico.
^3^Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA, USA.
^\*^Corresponding authors. Email:*
[**jdinneny@carnegiescience.edu**](mailto:jdinneny@carnegiescience.edu)*,*
[**dchitwood@danforthcenter.org**](mailto:dchitwood@danforthcenter.org)

On November 9, 2015, we initiated a petition to gauge the support of the
plant scientific community for the use of advanced genetic modification
approaches for crop improvement (*1*). Over 1,400 individuals have
signed a statement, which advocates the position of the American Society
of Plant Biologists—the largest organization of plant scientists in the
world—on GMOs. The ASPB position statement “supports the continued
responsible use of genetic engineering … as an effective tool for
advancing food security and reducing the negative environmental impacts
of agriculture” (*2*). This position, supported by our petitioners, and
voiced by other scientists via governmental and scientific organizations
from throughout the world (*3-8*), invokes that science guide decisions
about GMO safety and efficacy.

The signatories of our petition represent a worldwide network of
scientists with expertise in plant science (**Fig. 1A**). Petitioners
have authored over 17,600 publications, as retrieved from
Scopus-identified author curations (*9*), in areas relevant to the
molecular and genetic mechanisms underlying plant growth, development,
and responses to environmental stresses as well as the genetic
manipulation of plants, through breeding and molecular-based
technologies (**Fig. 1B**). Thus, our consortium of petitioners
represents an essential segment of the international scientific
community adept at evaluating the molecular basis of GM technology
compared to other methods of crop improvement.

Petitioner comments highlight the strong support highly respected
scientists have for the use of GM technology in agriculture. Matthew
Scott, Carnegie Institution for Science President and Stanford Professor
Emeritus, and a life member of the Sierra Club, writes “*GMO crops,
deployed appropriately in light of scientific knowledge and societal and
environmental imperatives, can improve food and health substantially
without detriment to the environment. In fact there is considerable
potential for lowering damage to the environment through use of GMOs to
reduce pesticide and fertilizer excesses*.” Detlef Weigel, Director at
the Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, states, “*While GMOs
are not a panacea for solving every agricultural problem, their use is
an essential tool for modern crop improvement. To overcome challenges
such as climate change, we need to draw on every technology available to
make crops more resilient.*” Mark Tester, Professor of Bioscience at the
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, writes, “*GM
technologies are another tool to support our efforts to increase food
production sustainably. There are no sound scientific reasons to oppose
the use of this tool, neither theoretical nor experimental. To deny
opportunities provided by this technology, especially for developing
countries is, in fact, immoral.*”

Our petition gives voice to the individual scientist and demonstrates to
the broader public that scientific consensus exists regarding the
efficacy and safety of GM technology for foods and other agricultural
products. Such consensus amongst plant scientists is further supported
by similar position statements from internationally recognized
scientific organizations such as the American Medical Association (*3*),
US National Academy of Sciences (*4*), the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) (*5*) and the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) (*6*) and international organizations such as the
European Commission (*7*) and World Health Organization (*8*).

Despite such broad support for GM technology, anti-GMO advocates have
had an extensive and troubling impact on policy—at the governmental
level and through biasing public opinion—regarding the use of GMO-based
ingredients in consumer products and food. More worrisome is that these
arguments are often founded on retracted science previously demonstrated
to be unsound (*10*), such as that of Séralini et al. (*11*) claiming
that rats fed genetically modified corn and the herbicide RoundUp have
higher rates of tumor formation. For example, the European Network of
Scientists for Social and Environmental Responsibility (ENSSER)
organized a petition signed by 313 individuals in 2013 claiming that “no
consensus” exists regarding the safety of GMOs for human health and the
environment (*12*)*.* Commercial entities have seized upon ENSSER’s
statements to profit from unfounded fears in their consumer bases. The
Non-GMO Project, for example, cites the ENSSER petition (*13*) in its
efforts to verify the absence of GMOs in over 4,500 branded products.
The fast food restaurant chain Chipotle cites the ENSSER petition to
justify a campaign against GMO ingredients (*14*).

Consensus is defined as “general agreement” and in the scientific debate
regarding the safety of GM technology in agriculture, there is clear
consensus amongst scientists. Nevertheless, questions abound about how
to best implement GM technology as a tool. Our society must decide upon
how to address those socioeconomic factors that GM technology impacts
that fall outside the purview of plant science. Where we, as plant
scientists, can speak confidently is on the relative efficacy and safety
of technology applied to crop plants. To meet our current and future
food supply demands, without destroying our planet, we need every
efficacious tool available. We hope that the consensus among plant
scientists presented here is heard by policy makers, the business
community, and, more importantly, the general public and initiates a new
conversation on how best to implement GM tools to improve crops for
sustainable agriculture (*15*). We invite advocates of the responsible
use of such tools to read our position statement, sign the petition and
make your voice heard to encourage a scientific-approach in agricultural
research and GMO policy.

REFERENCES AND NOTES

1.  Scientists in Support of GMO Technology for Crop Improvement.
    Cornell Alliance for Science. 5 January 2016;
    [*http://cas.nonprofitsoapbox.com/aspbsupportstatement*](http://cas.nonprofitsoapbox.com/aspbsupportstatement).

2.  Revised Position Statement on Plant Genetic Engineering. American
    Society of Plant Biologists. 5 January 2016;
    [*https://c.ymcdn.com/sites/aspb.site-ym.com/resource/group/6d461cb9-5b79-4571-a164-924fa40395a5/Statements/ASPB\_GE\_revision.APPROVED\_ed.pdf*](https://c.ymcdn.com/sites/aspb.site-ym.com/resource/group/6d461cb9-5b79-4571-a164-924fa40395a5/Statements/ASPB_GE_revision.APPROVED_ed.pdf)

3.  H-480.958 Bioengineered (Genetically Engineered) Crops and Foods.
    American Medical Association. 12 January 2016;
    [*https://www.ama-assn.org/ssl3/ecomm/PolicyFinderForm.pl?site=www.ama-assn.org&uri=/resources/html/PolicyFinder/policyfiles/HnE/H-480.958.HTM*](https://www.ama-assn.org/ssl3/ecomm/PolicyFinderForm.pl?site=www.ama-assn.org&uri=/resources/html/PolicyFinder/policyfiles/HnE/H-480.958.HTM)

4.  Safety of Genetically Engineered Foods. Institute of Medicine and
    National Research Council of the National Academies. The National
    Academies Press: Washingon, D.C. 5 January 2016;
    [*http://www.nap.edu/read/10977/chapter/1*](http://www.nap.edu/read/10977/chapter/1)

5.  Statement by the AAAS Board of Directors On Labeling of Genetically
    Modified Foods. American Association for the Advancement of Science.
    5 January 2016;
    [*http://www.aaas.org/news/statement-aaas-board-directors-labeling-genetically-modified-foods*](http://www.aaas.org/news/statement-aaas-board-directors-labeling-genetically-modified-foods)

6.  Statement of Policy - Foods Derived from New Plant Varieties. U.S.
    Food and Drug Administration. 5 January 2016;
    [*http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/Biotechnology/ucm096095.htm*](http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/Biotechnology/ucm096095.htm)

7.  Genetically Modified Organisms. European Commission. 5 January 2016;
    [*http://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/gmo/index\_en.htm*](http://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/gmo/index_en.htm)

8.  Food, Genetically Modified. World Health Organization. 5 January
    2016;
    [*http://www.who.int/topics/food\_genetically\_modified/en/*](http://www.who.int/topics/food_genetically_modified/en/)

9.  Data and scripts used for meta-analysis. 5 January 2016;
    [*https://github.com/nfahlgren/scopus\_publications\_analysis*](https://github.com/nfahlgren/scopus_publications_analysis)

10. Democratising Science & Decision Making. European Network of
    Scientists for Social and Environmental Responsibility. 5 January
    2016;
    *http://www.ensser.org/democratising-science-decision-making/*.

11. G.E. Séralini, E. Clair, R. Mesnage, S. Gress, N. Defarge, M.
    Malatesta, D. Hennequin, J.S. De Vendômois, J. S. (2012). RETRACTED:
    Long term toxicity of a Roundup herbicide and a Roundup-tolerant
    genetically modified maize. *Food and chemical toxicology*,
    *50*(11), 4221-4231.

12. Scientific Consensus on GMO Safety. European Network of Scientists
    for Social and Environmental Responsibility. 5 January 2016;
    [*http://www.ensser.org/fileadmin/user\_upload/150120\_signatories\_no\_consensus\_lv.pdf*](http://www.ensser.org/fileadmin/user_upload/150120_signatories_no_consensus_lv.pdf).

13. GMO Myths and Truths. The Non-GMO Project. 5 January 2016;
    [*http://www.nongmoproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/GMO-Myths-and-Truths-edition2.pdf*](http://www.nongmoproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/GMO-Myths-and-Truths-edition2.pdf).

14. Food with Integrity. G-M-OVER IT. Chipotle. 5 January 2016;
    [*https://chipotle.com/gmo*](https://chipotle.com/gmo)

15. We Need a New Green Revolution. The New York Times. 11 January 2016;
    [*http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/04/opinion/we-need-a-new-green-revolution.html*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/04/opinion/we-need-a-new-green-revolution.html)


![Figure 1](figures/Policy_figure.tif)**Plant scientists around the world support the safety of genetic
modification technology.** (**A**) Map showing nationalities of
around 1,400 individuals, from around the world, signing a petition in
support of the safety of GMOs (*1*). (**B**) Word cloud representing the
expertise of petitioners in plant science, molecular biology, and
genetics. Word frequencies derived from titles of &gt;17,600
publications authored by the petitioners. Data can be found online
(*9*). Species names have been omitted from the analysis.
